# **Adapter** – **Raw Infra × Verifier**  

I once met a guy who built a `CQRS` system that wrote a giant JSON dump to `ELK` for every single API call.  
**Yes, every call.*  

To **“optimize performance”**, he also kept a cached copy of that file in memory, which meant the server `RAM` was always filled.

If you triggered his API twice per second, the entire service would crash.
Not slow down, **just crash**.

I don't khow how the story end up, I never met him again.

Watching that system run reminded me of dystopian movies where prisoners get beaten until they “confess”, then get water poured on them to wake them up and beat them again.
Except in this story, the poor prisoner was the server.

So I make this to **free the poor server** from it's circle of suffering. 
May it find a better life in its next deployment.


## **The Pattern**
**Yes, still no misuse, sad*

First, just to be clear, **if you want to call anything outside of you app**, you much have an `Adapter` for it.

And if anyone calls you **as a service (not presentation)** you should also have a `Adapter`.   
(**Yes, atleast I reinvent `Hexa`)*

**There is no one-size-fits-all `Adapter`.  
Each type requires its own strategy, but these are thing you should aim for.**

1. You will want the `Adapter` run as light as posible.
2. You probably want to abuse asynchronous development (**Yes*).
3. You don't have to handle everything at the time it touch your server. Just leave it in any kind of storage then do the job when your server got resouce.  
( **Or forget it, who know?* )

